# Free Motion Camera Rig

Check out the [full presentation](https://www.behance.net/gallery/44375157/Free-Motion-Camera-Rig) on Behance.

Free Motion Camera Rig is a simple but effective camera animation concept that's useful
for both professionals and beginners. With a little practice, it won't be a problem to make
great "free motion" camera animations. But it's important to note that the Free Motion Camera Rig
is more of a usage concept than just a tool.


The key to the concept is to keep the necessary parameters separate,
so we can easily work with them. There are 10 camera controls in 3 groups:
3 in each of the two basic groups and 4 in the extra group.



# Controls

1 Position Group
XYZ-Base positions are usually set at the Main Point of Action

- X-Position
- Y-Position
- Z-Position


2 Rotations Group
DHV point - Intersection of Distance, Horizon, Vertical

- Distance
- Horizon
- Vertical

3 Head Extra Group
"Head on Shoulders" on DHV point (limit -90° to 90°)

- Roll
- Tilt (aka Pitch)
- Sideways (aka Yaw)
- Slide (aka Dolly)

— All parameter controls are stored in the main node of "FMCR".
Animating other transforms of the rig will break
the concept of usage. They're locked by default.

— Use the parametric controls of the rig. A good way to control
movement from the camera view, just like you're piloting a plane.
It's a very convenient way to keep things organized in your mind.

— Use trajectory curves for the animation tracks of the rig.
Since all parameters are clearly separate from each other,
all graphs represent human-readable data.

— It's helpful to use the align tool (or some sort of snap tool)
for positioning the XYZ-Base coordinate of the rig.
With a keyboard shortcut, of course.

— It's recommended to assign a hotkey
to the "select FMCR in scene" action for a smooth
animation workflow (so you can quickly select it whenever you need).






# Theory
Problem. During camera animation work, we're always dealing with at least one Main Point of Action (MPA)
that we're currently looking at. The most basic way to control the MPA with the camera is to constrain the angle of view to a "target" point.
But when we do that, we lose complete control of rotation, which becomes dynamically generated by the "look at target" constraint, and camera movement becomes unpredictable. On the other hand, if we just use basic transforms of the camera, we can never precisely control the MPA, especially in motion, because every rotation will turn the camera away from the MPA.

Basic Solution. If we set up the camera on a ring around the MPA, we can precisely control all possible view angles with only three simple parameters: Distance, Horizon angle, Vertical angle (all relative to the MPA). This is a common solution in camera animation, but things can get complicated as you go further. It's always easy to start adding unnecessary nodes
and axes to the rig structure, some sort of additional nodes for every particular situation. But every additional child node brings
all rotations and offsets into the structure. It's hard to deal with several rotation points, especially if degrees aren't limited.

Improved solution. If we want to make a camera rig a bit more universal, it's a good idea to keep as few active parameters as possible. In the first step, we had a simple "camera on ring". To keep things organized, let's name the point created by the intersection of Distance, Horizon, Vertical values — DHV point. This is the second important point after MPA.


In addition to the previous simple structure "camera on ring", we can add some extra camera movement possibilities (from real-life situations) if we add just one "head" structure at the DHV point. We probably don't want to use all possible transform parameters from our new "head". For most cases, it's enough to use just rotations. And our movement will be more natural
if we limit rotation from -90 to 90 degrees, which imitates the rotation of the real "head on shoulders".
After all, we'll get three more parameters:

Tilt — to look up and down. Like "Pitch" in airplane controls.
Sideways — left and right. Like "Yaw" in airplane controls.
Roll — it's also called "bank" sometimes.

In fact, we can call all these parameters "extra", because they don't really make the basic movement of the camera, they just improve the animation of the DHV. It's better to think about this control group as additional, and animate these parameters after all the others. Otherwise, they can mess things up in your mind.

This rig structure has worked well over years of practice. But after many experiments with this setup, one more parameter appears to be very useful for slowdowns at the end of animation movements. In terms of rig structure, we can call it an additional "camera slider" to make "head" movement forward and backward instead of just staying still.
This improvement requires the addition of one new axis to the previous structure.

Eventually, we have 10 camera controls in three groups, optimized for all kinds of situations.
To make more complicated camera movements, we can constrain the XYZ-Base position of the rig to follow a path, or to several other points in the scene (nulls, locators, dummies, etc.) that could also move, rotate, or just define different parts of the scene.





# Issues
Since all software packages export animation and rigged objects differently (and in different formats), in some cases there may be camera export problems.
Baking a single camera object and exporting it should solve the issue.



# Thank you
Thank you for your interest in this research about camera animation.
Keep things under control!
